doc(scanner): ADR: Versioning of vulnerability bundles (#12163)
stackrox/stackrox: scanner/decisions/0010-separate-versioning-for-vuln-bundles.md

# 0010 - Separate Versioning Stream for Vulnerability Bundles

- **Author(s):** J. Victor Martins <jvdm@sdf.org>
- **Created:** [2024-07-22 Mon]

## Status

Status: Accepted

Updates: [#0009](0009-scannerv4-read-manual-vulnerabilities.md)

## Context

A Vulnerability Bundle is an archive containing updates to vulnerability data in Scanner V4 (aka. Scanner).  They are constantly updated by the Vulnerability Exporter (aka. Exporter), which runs periodically in GitHub Workflows and uses ClairCore to fetch the security data to convert it to a JSON-based schema.  Then, the workflow bundles the data into a ZIP archive.  ClairCore owns the schema.

The Scanner Matcher, using ClairCore, runs the Vulnerability Updater (aka. Updater), which fetches the bundle, parses the data, and updates the vulnerability database.

Suppose a backward-incompatible schema change is made in ClairCore and incorporated into Scanner.  In that case, the following Exporter execution will update the bundle adhering to the new schema.  Existing Scanner instances can only parse the changed data if they upgrade to the new ClairCore version that understands the schema changes.

> Due to the tight coupling between the ClairCore version and schema, Scanner created one bundle per StackRox release.

Author: OK, let's update it.

2.  It can be challenging to backport fixes and updates to previous releases.  This requires patch releases, which trigger the release workflow.  Improving the release process can be complex, as it may require patch release cuts, changes to different branches, and integration between logic that is managed in the master branch, executing other releases binaries.
3.  The latest offline bundles does not support post `4.5` releases.  Bundle embedding for each release increases the cost to store and consume offline bundles.  The `roxctl` interface and documentation today needs to be clearer on these limitations.

## Decision

We will implement a versioning stream for vulnerability bundles, bumped when we determine that ClairCore's schema has changed.

Initially, two version streams will exist (table 1 below):

| Stream | Git Ref      | Description                                                        |
|--------|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| dev    | heads/master | This stream tracks the latest vulnerability schema                 |

> | v1     | heads/4.4.5  | This stream tracks the schema used by the current StackRox release |

Author: Updated the table to reference current latest releases and clarified some points about automation.

On the subsequent releases (for example,. `4.4.6`), one of the two will be carried out:

1.  The schema hasn't changed, so v1 now tracks the new release (`heads/4.4.6`).
2.  The schema has changed, so v1 stays at the current release (`heads/4.4.5`), and a new version, v2, is created to track the next release (`heads/4.4.6`).

### Building versioned bundles

> The GitHub workflow will have a map with "bundle version" as keys and "git reference" as values, similar to Table 1 above.  This can be stored statically in the matrix definition.

Reviewer: so inside the workflow's YAML config?

Reviewer: Is this manually updated?

Author: The specific location is not specified in the ADR. It could be in the YAML's config vs. a file in the repository.

> Is this manually updated?

Initially yes. It can be automated, AFAIK -- but I don't want to spread the decision here to other parts of the release automation workflows, scripts, etc.

Author: Any concerns here? Or just clarifying? Can we resolve?

For each version in the mapping, a bundle will be built based on the specified git ref and stored at `https://definitions.stackrox.io/v4/<bundle-version>/vulnerabilities.zip`.

> In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release branch reference (e.g., `heads/4.4.6`).  Notice that if the version is the same, it will be updated.  If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.

Author: > It sounds like this is only updated upon release, but I think we'd want to update this as soon as we are aware of a schema change (sometime during the dev cycle). Is this allowed? If so, can we make it clear?

I thought it was clear. I will explain here and you let me know.

> When a schema bump is detected (e.g., a ClairCore bump that brings in incompatible schema changes to the vulnerability structs), `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` should be updated to the new schema version.

It means as soon as we are aware of a schema change (during the dev cycle) we bump the schema in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION`. It means the "dev" version bundle stream will be on the new schema, all non-release builds will break until they upgrade, but that's OK. Release and nightlies will continue to use "v1" until they upgrade.

> In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release branch reference (e.g., `heads/4.4.6`).  Notice that if the version is the same, it will be updated.  If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.

This is the mapping. It says "for the current VULNERABILITY_VERSION, what is the git ref we should use to build it?" -- we need to either bump it to the latest release, or create a new entry in the map to leave the last version in its current release.

I hope that clarifies.

> In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release branch reference (e.g., `heads/4.4.6`).  Notice that if the version is the same, it will be updated.  If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.

Author: All good? Still have concerns?

For example, in release cut 4.6 we would look into `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION`, let's say its contents are:

```
$ cat canner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION
v1
```

The mapping should be updated, so `v1` points to the current release branch reference. Let's say the mapping was:

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `heads/release-4.5`

Then, `v1` is updated to the new release (in this example `release-4.6`):

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `heads/release-4.6`

> If in throught 4.6 the bundle version was updated:

Reviewer: If in throught?

The bundle version will be configured in the vulnerability URL by a new variable called `ROX_VULNERABILITY_VERSION` to specify the expected bundle version to fetch.  The previous variable `ROX_VERSION` will be left for backward compatibility.

The vulnreability bundle will include a `manifest.json` file, which will carry the StackRox version and bundle version used to build it.  This file will be used by Scanner to prevent ingestion of unsupported bundle versions.

### Changing schema

When a schema bump is detected (e.g., a ClairCore bump that brings in incompatible schema changes to the vulnerability structs), `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` should be updated to the new schema version.

Once a StackRox release is out of support, we will remove the entry from the mapping after a grace period, effectively turning off updates for that stream.  The grace period duration will be documented but not specified on this decision record.

## Consequences

- Only necessary vulnerability fetching and parsing workflows will run at every update interval.  This is likely to happen once or twice until better schema handling is implemented in ClairCore.

> - Only necessary bundle formats and versions will exist.

Reviewer: vs unnecessary? I don't think I fully follow this

Author: Fixed it.

> - Minimal offline bundle size, ability to deprecate versioned offline bundles.

Reviewer: Perhaps I missed it, but what are we doing about the offline bundles? Will we continue to put everything inside (ignoring the fact we don't now, even though we said we would)?

Author: > Per-release offline bundles will continue only for 4.5.x releases.  Starting in 4.6.0, offline bundles will be published per version.  The latest offline bundle will ship all bundle versions currently supported by StackRox, to support customers using the previous workflow.  The `roxctl scanner download-db` will continue to support downloading the correct bundle per release using the `--version` command line option.

2.  It can be challenging to backport fixes and updates to previous releases.  This requires patch releases, which trigger the release workflow.  Improving the release process can be complex, as it may require patch release cuts, changes to different branches, and integration between logic that is managed in the master branch, executing other releases binaries.
3.  The latest offline bundles does not support post `4.5` releases.  Bundle embedding for each release increases the cost to store and consume offline bundles.  The `roxctl` interface and documentation today needs to be clearer on these limitations.

## Decision

We will implement a versioning stream for vulnerability bundles, bumped when we determine that ClairCore's schema has changed.

Initially, two version streams will exist (table 1 below):

| Stream | Git Ref      | Description                                                        |
|--------|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| dev    | heads/master | This stream tracks the latest vulnerability schema                 |

> | v1     | heads/release-4.5  | This stream tracks the schema used by the last StackRox release |

Author: A git ref can be any ref. Tracking `heads` is just taking the latest commits in a release branch. The ref for tags starts with `tags/*` instead of `heads/*`.

> | v1     | heads/release-4.5  | This stream tracks the schema used by the last StackRox release |

Reviewer 2: > Tracking heads is just taking the latest commits in a release branch. 

Exactly, the latest commit in the release branch is not always something that has been released - could be broken, bad cherry-pick, bad merge, untested, etc. IMHO we should only build bundles off of a ref that represents released code, which would be a tag in our case.

> | v1     | heads/release-4.5  | This stream tracks the schema used by the last StackRox release |

Reviewer 3: A tag is better in my opinion because we have the release process that makes sure released things are in good shape.

> | v1     | heads/release-4.5  | This stream tracks the schema used by the last StackRox release |

Author: I will resolve this.

Due to the tight coupling between the ClairCore version and schema, one bundle per StackRox release was introduced for Scanner V4.

Each bundle is created with an Exporter running the same ClairCore version used to build the release, ensuring compatibility.  The Exporter serves bundles at `https://definitions.stackrox.io/v4/<version>/vulnerabilities.zip` where `<version>` is the supported StackRox release (such as "4.5.0").  Scanner uses its release version tagged during build time to determine which URL to fetch from.

In offline mode, one offline bundle per release was introduced for Scanner V4, coexisting with the "latest" Scanner V2 offline bundles.  To facilitate user migration to per-release offline bundles, the latest offline bundle used by Scanner V2 (at the time of this writing served at https://install.stackrox.io/scanner/scanner-vuln-updates.zip) was changed to contain Scanner V4's offline bundles for `4.[45][.x]` releases.  A command `roxctl scanner download-db` was created to facilitate users fetching the right offline bundle for their release.

This approach needs to be revised for the following reasons:

> 1.  The vulnerability schema rarely changes, and maintaining multiple bundles is expensive.  It requires multiple GitHub workflow runs, which increases the chances of failure and pressure on the security sources' endpoints.

Reviewer: Thinking about it some more another factor would be the removal of an updater. For example, the `rhel-vex` updater will replace all `RHELX-XXX` updaters. These vulnerabilities may not be properly matched with older versions of Scanner V4 (the matching logic changed to accommodate the update), so I don't think we can use the VEX data with older Scanner V4 versions. So, this may be an example where the schema did not change, but there was a significant enough change which will cause us to bump versions.

Author: That's valid. Unless we keep both data in the bundle, and the `updater.Import()` to ignore OVAL RHEL updaters. Feels like bumping the version a cleaner way to do this.

2.  It can be challenging to backport fixes and updates to previous releases.  This requires patch releases, which trigger the release workflow.  Improving the release process can be complex, as it may require patch release cuts, changes to different branches, and integration between logic that is managed in the master branch, executing other releases binaries.
3.  The latest offline bundles does not support post `4.5` releases.  Bundle embedding for each release increases the cost to store and consume offline bundles.  The `roxctl` interface and documentation today needs to be clearer on these limitations.

## Decision

> We will implement a versioning stream for vulnerability bundles, bumped when we determine that ClairCore's schema has changed.

Reviewer: related to above, but to be clear, I do believe there are non-schema-related changes which may cause this bump

Author: I've added a footnote to clarify.

Author: A footnote was added to clarify this.

On the subsequent releases (for example, `4.6.0`), one of the two will be carried out:

1.  The schema hasn't changed, so v1 now tracks the new release branch (`tags/4.6.0`).

   | Stream | Source Ref   |
   |--------|--------------|
   | dev    | heads/master |
   | v1     | tags/4.6.0   |

2.  The schema has changed, so v1 stays at the current git ref (`tags/4.5.0`), and a new version, v2, is created to track the next release (`tags/4.6.0`).

   | Stream | Source Ref   |
   |--------|--------------|
   | dev    | heads/master |
   | v1     | tags/4.5.0   |
   | v2     | tags/4.6.0   |

This process could be either manual or automated.

### Building versioned bundles

#### Online mode

The GitHub workflow will have a map with "bundle version" as keys and "source reference" as values, similar to Table 1 above.  This map can be stored statically in the matrix definition or as a file in the source repository.

A source reference can be one of the following:

1.  A branch reference, `heads/<branch-name>`, example: `heads/release-4.6`
2.  A tag reference, `tags/<tag-name>`, example: `tags/4.6.0`.
3.  A StackRox release, `release/<stackrox-release>`, example: `release/4.6.0`

> Both (1.) and (2.) will determine a specific commit to use to build the vulnerability exporter.

Reviewer: When will (1) determine a specific commit? The latest commit in a branch may change. When is the commit determined?

Author: 1. will determine a branch reference; Branch references move to different commits as changes are done to the repository. Whenever the workflow runs, the current branch reference will be used.

> (3.) will select a desired release build based on a StackRox target release.  The workflow will find the best matching Git tag for the specified `<stackrox-release>`, by checking if the version exists as a tag or matching it against release candidate (`-rc`) or patch (`.x`) tags.

Reviewer: I understand the rc tags, but I'm confused by the patch tags. Wouldn't we just use `tags/4.6.1` for a patch release?

Author: We can, but during the release, the tag is not cut until the release is ready. Using `<stackrox-release>` allow us to start building bundles for that release based on the release candidates upfront, without having to update this mapping manually.

Reviewer: Can you give an example for when the `.x` patch tag would be used? I'm still having a hard time understanding this part completely

Author: It takes precedence over the `-rc` tags. An typically it's the parent of the release branch commit path/lineage. Although, for 4.5, it was tagged `4.6.x`:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ac09c86c-4f94-4c93-a946-0d45dfa72008)

Reviewer: ah ok, so `x` is not a variable in this case, but literally the letter `x`. Makes sense

Though, what you mention may be something to think about a bit more: I do recall discussion (and I guess an active change) to switch our development versioning scheme. Once a release branch cut, like 4.4, then all subsequent versions were tagged with something like 4.4.x-<whatever>. However, starting with 4.5, I believe it was decided to do `minor + 1`, so it's currently `4.6.x-<whatever>` instead of `4.5.x-<whatever>`. I believe the idea was to make it clear you are now developing for `4.6` instead of for `4.5`.

Given this, for `4.5+`, this may need to be adjusted to `4.<minor + 1>.x-<whatever>`. Is that worth updating here, or is that more of an implementation detail?

Author: Interesting. I need to follow-up on this new versioning schema. And I think I will leave it as an implementation detail, best to make the ADR last longer instead of us having outdated docs, or having to catch up with new versioning/tag systems.

Author: I will resolve this, but took https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ROX-26053

For each version in the mapping, a bundle will be built based on the determined git ref and stored at `https://definitions.stackrox.io/v4/<bundle-version>/vulnerabilities.zip`.

In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release reference (e.g., `release/4.6.0`).  Notice that the key is still updated if the version is the same.   If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.

For example, in release cut 4.6 we would look into `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION`, let's say its contents are:

```

> $ cat canner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cat scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION
```

v1
```

> The mapping should be updated so `v1` points to the current release branch reference.  Let's say the mapping was:

Reviewer: Is this mapping stored somewhere for reference?

Author: Not specified, from the ADR:

> This map can be stored statically in the matrix definition or as a file in the source repository.

bundle version | git reference

> --- | ---

Reviewer: GitHub seems to have unfortunate formatting when looking at the raw `.md` file. When rendered, is this pretty?

Author: There's a button in the PR's diff interface you can use to check how it looks like rendered by GitHub.

`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `release/4.5.0`

Then, `v1` is updated to the new release (in this example, `4.6.0`):

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `release/4.6.0`

If in 4.6 the bundle version was updated to:

```

> $ cat canner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cat scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION
```

v2
```

On 4.6.0 release cut, the final mapping would be:

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `release/4.5.0`
`v2` | `release/4.6.0`

#### Offline mode

Per-release offline bundles will continue to be published.  They will be versioned by StackRox releases, but they will not be based on Y-stream (`4.5`) but on Z-stream patch releases (`4.5.0`).  The bundle will contain the correct vulnerability bundle for that particular Z-stream release.  The `manifest.json` file will continue to have a "version" attribute pointing out the Y-stream for that offline bundle, but two other fields will be added: "vulnerability_version" and "release_versions".  For example, for patch release `4.6.1` the offline bundle could be:

```
{
  "version": "4.6",
  "created": "2024-08-20T21:00:30+00:00",

>   "release_versions": ["4.6.0", "4.6.1", ...],

Reviewer: the `...` implies there may be more. Why would 4.6.1 know about more than just 4.6.0 and 4.6.1?

Also, can you explain why we introduce this? How does it differ from what we did before with just `version`?

Author: > the ... implies there may be more. Why would 4.6.1 know about more than just 4.6.0 and 4.6.1?

Not sure I follow your question. I think it might be just a confusion in the example: By adding `...` I am trying to say that the list will go until the latest release.

This will allow Central to validate if this bundle supports its version. If Central is running `4.5.0` in this example, it will reject the bundle.

Original "version" shows the bundle schema version now for versioned bundles. It's not useful for Central to decide to reject or accept the bundle because Central doesn't have visibility into the Scanner's schema version. And that's by design.

Reviewer: >> the ... implies there may be more. Why would 4.6.1 know about more than just 4.6.0 and 4.6.1?
>
>Not sure I follow your question. I think it might be just a confusion in the example: By adding ... I am trying to say that the list will go until the latest release.

Yeah, I was confused because the previous paragraph said this was an example for `4.6.1`, so I did not expect to see anything more than `4.6.0` and `4.6.1`. Can you perhaps update the patch version for the example and then make this concrete?

> I considered getting rid of vulnerability_version and use only version. In 4.[45].x bundles it will be "4.4" or "4.5", in schema versioned bundles, it will be be the schema version (e.g. "v1"), FYI.

I don't recall what this file looked like previously. Was there a `vulnerability_version` field which you ended up removing?

Author: Yes, I ended up removing the `vulnerability_version` based on the consideration you quoted. Essentially, the "version" field is the Y-stream version pre 4.6; moving forward, it's the vulnerability bundle schema version (like "v1", "v2", so on so forth...).

  "vulnerability_version": "v1"
}
```

> The central definitions handler will validate the offline bundle POST against `release_versions` to ensure the running Central version is supported.  And, when consuming the offline bundle, against "vulnerability_version", guaranteeing the bundle supports the Scanner requested schema version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The central definitions handler will validate the offline bundle POST against `release_versions` to ensure the running Central version is supported.  And, when consuming the offline bundle, against `vulnerability_version`, guaranteeing the bundle supports the Scanner requested schema version.
```

Reviewer: Also, can you rephrase the last sentence?

```
 And, when consuming the offline bundle, against "vulnerability_version", guaranteeing the bundle supports the Scanner requested schema version.
```

Do you mean `guarantees`?

> We will continue to offer the latest offline bundles.  They will contain all offline bundles versioned by schema, and the existing `4.5` bundle to continue to be added for backward compatibility.  Example:

Reviewer: > We will continue to offer the latest offline bundles.

This refers to install.stackrox.io/... right?

Author: Yes, not the bundle in `definitions.stackrox.io`, named `scanner-v4-defs-*.zip`.

```

> unzip -l scanner-vuln-updates.zip                                                                             [~]

Reviewer: nit: is the `[~]` needed?

Author: No.

Archive:  scanner-vuln-updates.zip
  Length      Date    Time    Name
---------  ---------- -----   ----
171516200  2024-08-20 21:00   scanner-defs.zip
   248088  2024-08-20 21:00   k8s-istio.zip
191673607  2024-08-20 21:00   scanner-v4-defs-v1.zip
191673030  2024-08-20 21:00   scanner-v4-defs-v2.zip
191673030  2024-08-20 21:00   scanner-v4-defs-4.5.zip
---------                     -------

> 363437895                     3 files

Reviewer: what are these numbers in human readable format? A few MB? GB? Perhaps this is just dummy data, but I am curious what the size of this looks like

Author: 191673030 -> 191 673 030 -> 191 million bytes -> <= 200MiB

```

The `roxctl scanner download-db` will continue to support downloading the correct bundle per release using the `--version` command line option.

### Ingesting versioned bundles

Scanner will know the vulnerability version it requires based on hard-coded information added during build time.  A file at `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will determine the version on release builds and nightlies.  On non-release builds this will hard-coded to "dev".

> The definitions handler in Central can be kept the same.  It already supports arbitrary versions in the GET request from Scanner.  [The check for nightlies](https://github.com/stackrox/stackrox/blob/e332cd19a639f59d9931414a4f4e561981396dad/central/scannerdefinitions/handler/handler.go#L661) and other per-release checks in the ingestion path are unnecessary and will be removed.

Reviewer: The hardcoding for nightlies exists because nightlies are release builds, and we never published vuln data for the particular nightly tag. With the new schema, removing this check will be ok, though, because it will be associated with something like `v1`, right?

Author: It will be associated with `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION`, initially `v1`, yes. And `v1` should be available based on latest master branch build.

> # 0010 - Separate Versioning Stream for Vulnerability Bundles

Reviewer: heads up, this is now 0011 (same for the file name)

In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release reference (e.g., `release/4.6.0`).  Notice that the key is still updated if the version is the same.   If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.

For example, in release cut 4.6 we would look into `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION`, let's say its contents are:

```
$ cat scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION
v1
```

The mapping should be updated so `v1` points to the current release branch reference.  Let's say the mapping was:

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `4.5.0`

Then, `v1` is updated to the new release (in this example, `4.6.0`):

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `4.6.0`

If in 4.6 the bundle version was updated to:

```
$ cat scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION
v2
```

On 4.6.0 release cut, the final mapping would be:

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `4.5.0`
`v2` | `4.6.0`

#### Offline mode

> Per-release offline bundles will continue to be published.  They will be versioned by StackRox releases, but they will not be based on Y-stream (`4.5`) but on Z-stream patch releases (`4.5.0`).  The bundle will contain the correct vulnerability bundle for that particular Z-stream release.  The `manifest.json` file will continue to have a "version" attribute, but it shows the vulnerability schema version. Except for `4.[45].x` releases, where it points to the Y-stream of that offline bundle for backward compatibility.  An additional field `release_versions` will provide the full list of Z-stream releases supported by this bundle.  For example, for patch release `4.6.1` the offline bundle could be:

Reviewer: super nit:
```suggestion
Per-release offline bundles will continue to be published.  They will be versioned by StackRox releases, but they will not be based on Y-stream (`4.5`), but rather on Z-stream patch releases (`4.5.0`).  The bundle will contain the correct vulnerability bundle for that particular Z-stream release.  The `manifest.json` file will continue to have a "version" attribute, but it shows the vulnerability schema version. Except for `4.[45].x` releases, where it points to the Y-stream of that offline bundle for backward compatibility.  An additional field `release_versions` will provide the full list of Z-stream releases supported by this bundle.  For example, for patch release `4.6.1` the offline bundle could be:
```

# 0010 - Separate Versioning Stream for Vulnerability Bundles

- **Author(s):** J. Victor Martins <jvdm@sdf.org>
- **Created:** [2024-07-22 Mon]

## Status

Status: Accepted

Updates: [#0009](0009-scannerv4-read-manual-vulnerabilities.md)

## Context

A Vulnerability Bundle is an archive containing updates to vulnerability data in Scanner.  They are constantly updated by the Vulnerability Exporter (aka. Exporter), which runs periodically in GitHub's Workflows and uses ClairCore to fetch the security data to convert it to a JSON-based schema.  Then, the workflow bundles the data into a ZIP archive.  The schema is owned by ClairCore.

> A Scanner instance runs the Vulnerability Updater (aka. Updater) to fetch the bundle and use ClairCore to parse the schema and update the vulnerability database.  Suppose ClairCore changes the schema in a backward-incompatible manner, and the Exporter updates the bundle.  In that case, existing Scanner instances cannot consume the data.  A Scanner version bump to a version with a ClairCore version supporting the new schema would be required.  Until that bump happens, no vulnerability update will occur. 

Reviewer 3: > Suppose ClairCore changes the schema in a backward-incompatible manner, and the Exporter updates the bundle.

Personally I think "suppose" is a bit odd in an ADR because that's a case we know will likely happen. I would say "One case that needs to be taken into consideration is that ClairCore changes the schema in a backward-incompatible manner."

Reviewer 3: Yes, very minor.

> A Scanner instance runs the Vulnerability Updater (aka. Updater) to fetch the bundle and use ClairCore to parse the schema and update the vulnerability database.  Suppose ClairCore changes the schema in a backward-incompatible manner, and the Exporter updates the bundle.  In that case, existing Scanner instances cannot consume the data.  A Scanner version bump to a version with a ClairCore version supporting the new schema would be required.  Until that bump happens, no vulnerability update will occur. 

Author: Adopted it.

> A Scanner instance runs the Vulnerability Updater (aka. Updater) to fetch the bundle and use ClairCore to parse the schema and update the vulnerability database.  Suppose ClairCore changed the schema in a backward-incompatible manner, and that change is incorporate in the Scanner repository (a ClairCore version bump).  In that scenario, the next Exporter execution will update the bundle with the new schema.  Then, existing Scanner instances won't be able to consume the data.  A Scanner version bump to a version of ClairCore supporting the new schema would be required.

Author: OK, so for this one it seems it's just style and not a correction of the message/content/information, is that right?

> A Scanner instance runs the Vulnerability Updater (aka. Updater) to fetch the bundle and use ClairCore to parse the schema and update the vulnerability database.  Suppose ClairCore changed the schema in a backward-incompatible manner, and that change is incorporate in the Scanner repository (a ClairCore version bump).  In that scenario, the next Exporter execution will update the bundle with the new schema.  Then, existing Scanner instances won't be able to consume the data.  A Scanner version bump to a version of ClairCore supporting the new schema would be required.

Reviewer 2: Thats right, up to you - i was getting lost into the words/relationships / thought maybe this would simplify it.

> To address that scenario, Scanner created one bundle per Stackrox release.  Each bundle is created with an Exporter running the same ClairCore version used to build the release, ensuring compatibility.  Bundles are served at `https://definitions.stackrox.io/v4/V/vulnerabilities.zip` where `V` will be a Stackrox release version such as "4.5.0".  Scanner uses its release version tagged during build time to determine which version to fetch from.  The versions to build bundles for are taken from a file named `scanner/updater/version/RELEASE_VERSION`.

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
Due to the tight coupling between the ClairCore version and schema. Scanner created one bundle per Stackrox release.  Each bundle is created with an Exporter running the same ClairCore version used to build the release, ensuring compatibility.  Bundles are served at `https://definitions.stackrox.io/v4/V/vulnerabilities.zip` where `V` will be a Stackrox release version such as `4.5.0`.  Scanner uses its release version tagged during build time to determine which version to fetch from.  The versions to build bundles for are read from a file named `scanner/updater/version/RELEASE_VERSION`.
```

Author: Not sure I understood the improvement here (except for the markdown formatting), can you clarify a bit?

Reviewer 2: "To address that scenario," made me question 'what scenario are we talking about again?" The previous paragraph had much in it, figured this would reduce any ambiguity.  The other changes are mostly formatting yes.

> To address that scenario, Scanner created one bundle per Stackrox release.  Each bundle is created with an Exporter running the same ClairCore version used to build the release, ensuring compatibility.  Bundles are served at `https://definitions.stackrox.io/v4/V/vulnerabilities.zip` where `V` will be a Stackrox release version such as "4.5.0".  Scanner uses its release version tagged during build time to determine which version to fetch from.  The versions to build bundles for are taken from a file named `scanner/updater/version/RELEASE_VERSION`.

Reviewer 2: > Bundles are served at https://definitions.stackrox.io/v4/V/vulnerabilities.zip where V will be a Stackrox release version such as "4.5.0". Scanner uses its release version tagged during build time to determine which version to fetch from

nit: This is just the online bundles, since this is just contextual may be OK - for completeness may be worth calling out the offline bundles with different versioning semantics and location

Author: Update it.

> For its purpose, this approach needs to be revised.

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
For the above reason(s), this approach needs to be revised.
```

Author: By "for its purpose" I meant "so it can fulfill its purpose and original goal". Is "the above reasons(s)" the same meaning as that?

Reviewer 2: Similar meaning yes - I was confused when reading what does 'its' refer to from the above paragraphs.  Is 'its' referring to scanner? scanner definitions? vulnerabilities? the issues identified? - and what is 'purpose' referring to - to scan images? to create bundles? to load bundles? etc.

Up to you, to me the change reduces the ambiguity / is more clear.

1. The vulnerability schema rarely changes, but maintaining multiple bundles is expensive.  It requires multiple GitHub workflow runs, which increases the chances of failure and pressure on the security sources' endpoints.
2. It isn't easy to backport fixes and updates to previous releases.  This requires patch releases, which trigger the release workflow.  Improving the release process is noisy, convoluted, and complex.

> 3. The offline mode's "latest bundle" needs to exist as a complex solution to help users transition to the versioned bundle.  It contains all versions in a single bundle.  But one bundle per release makes the latest bundle large and, most of the time, essentially carries the same data since the schema is the same.

Reviewer 2: The offline bundle is versioned as well, `roxctl scanner download-db` was created to address this concern to make it easier for users.  The commitment was for the latest archive to include the `4.4[.x]` offline bundles, no commitment was made to include `4.5[.x]` in the bundles.  The [docs](https://docs.openshift.com/acs/4.4/configuration/enable-offline-mode.html#download-scanner-definitions_enable-offline-mode) were also updated to recommend using `roxctl scanner download-db` over the latest archive.

## Decision

We will implement a versioning stream for vulnerability bundles, bumped when we determine that ClairCore's schema has changed.

Initially, two version streams will exist (table 1 below):

| Stream | Git Ref      | Description                                                        |
|--------|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| dev    | heads/master | This stream tracks the latest vulnerability schema                 |

> | v1     | heads/4.4.5  | This stream tracks the schema used by the current Stackrox release |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| v1     | heads/4.4.5  | This stream tracks the schema used by the current StackRox release |
```

> On the subsequent releases (for example,. `4.4.6`), one of the two will be carried out:

Reviewer 3: Could you please clarify if this step needs to be manually performed by the Scanner team, or will it be included as part of the release process? 
Could the workflow be briefly discussed in this ADR?

For example, if we have a new formal release (4.6.0) with a schema change and a patch release (4.4.6) is issued, how would this workflow operate?

Author: > Could you please clarify if this step needs to be manually performed by the Scanner team, or will it be included as part of the release process?

Yes, it should be included in the release process.

> For example, if we have a new formal release (4.6.0) with a schema change and a patch release (4.4.6) is issued, how would this workflow operate?

Mapping file before 4.6.0:

| Bundle Version | Git Reference |
| - | - |
| dev | heads/master |
| v1 | heads/4.4.5 |

Mapping file after 4.6.0:

| Bundle Version | Git Reference |
| - | - |
| dev | heads/master |
| v1 | heads/4.4.5 |
| v2 | heads/4.6.0 |

Mapping file after the patch release (notice: it's the same as above):

| Bundle Version | Git Reference |
| - | - |
| dev | heads/master |
| v1 | heads/4.4.5 |
| v2 | heads/4.6.0 |

Assuming the patch release `4.4.6` didn't adopt the new schema changes. If that's the case, then we would need to change the `VULNERABILITY_BUNDLE_VERSION` file of `4.4.6` to "v2". Notice we would still build v1 to make sure people using `4.4.5` would still get updates.

Does that clarify things for you?

1.  The schema hasn't changed, so v1 now tracks the new release (`heads/4.4.6`).

> 2.  The schema has changed, so v1 stays at current release (`heads/4.4.5`), and a new version, v2, is created to track the next release (`heads/4.4.6`).

Reviewer 2: Thoughts on using the ref directly instead of an arbitrary version?  In the example that would yield bundle versions `4.4.5` and `4.4.6`, therefore we would know immediately the min version of ACS that supports the provided bundle vs. having to do a translation.

That may simplify the rest of the approach defined below.

Author: That can be confusing. Let's transition happened at `4.4.5`, we have two bundles: `4.4.5` (schema v1) and `4.4.6` (schema v2). All subsequent versions for a while (4.5.0, 4.6.0, etc) would use `4.4.6` and that would raise questions. A separate mapping is cleaner, and easy to spot because we have one file on the repo (and hard-coded in the binary) of which bundle stream a given Scanner build needs.

### Building bundle version in Exporter

The GitHub workflow will have a map with "bundle version" as keys, and "git reference" as values, similar to table 1 above.  This can be stored statically in the matrix definition.

For each version in the mapping, a bundle will be built based on the specified git ref and stored at `https://definitions.stackrox.io/v4/<bundle-version>/vulnerabilities.zip`.

> In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release branch reference (e.g., `heads/4.4.6`).  Notice that if the version is the same, it will be updated.  If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.

Reviewer: Is this a new file? What happens to the old one?

Author: It seems you're referring to `scanner/updater/version/RELEASE_VERSION`. Is that right? It will continue to be, but holding version mappings, instead of ACS releases for building bundles.

### Selection bundle version in Scanner

Scanner will determine which version bundle it wants based on hard-coded information instead during build time.  A file at `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will determine the version on release builds and nightlies.  On non-release builds this will be set to "dev".

> Today scanner supports a special variable `ROX_VERSION` in the vulnerability URL configuration.  A new variable will be added called `ROX_SCANNER_VULNERABILITY_VERSION` to specify the expected bundle version to fetch.

Reviewer 3: I think staging (nightly build) can stop relying on "dev" version since the ADR mentioned
> A new variable will be added called `ROX_SCANNER_VULNERABILITY_VERSION` to specify the expected bundle version to fetch.

When a nightly is built, **_ROX_SCANNER_VULNERABILITY_VERSION_** should be pointing to the associate bundle version. Is this understanding correct?

Author: That's correct. It means if we bump the schema version in master, a new version will be provided in the `ROX_SCANNER_VULNERABILITY_VERSION`. After that, the workflow will be "dev" with the new schema, but since nightlies are using the version, it will only consume the new schema once it gets deployed.

> Today scanner supports a special variable `ROX_VERSION` in the vulnerability URL configuration.  A new variable will be added called `ROX_SCANNER_VULNERABILITY_VERSION` to specify the expected bundle version to fetch.

Reviewer: What is the purpose of the new variable? To avoid confusion with the old semantics? Compatibility purposes?

Author: The purpose is to specify the vulnerability bundle version in the vulnerability URL. Why it is being introduced (vs. using the same one) is due to the semantics associated with `ROX_VERSION`, pointing out it specifies the StackRox/ACS release version? Although, `ROX_VERSION` is pretty generic, a new variable seems cleaner and specific.

Author: Are we good here?

When a schema bump is detected (e.g., a ClairCore bump that brings in incompatible schema changes to the vulnerability structs), this file should be updated.

> The definitions handler in Central can be kept the same.  It already supports arbitrary versions in the GET request from Scanner.

Reviewer 2: On offline bundle upload - Central will need to determine what 'version' of the bundle is desired in order to perform validation - today that is done by comparing centrals version to the version of the bundle.  To support the validation - we may need to add an endpoint to indexer/matcher that returns the 'bundle version'

Reviewer 3: Central can get the bundle version from variable **_ROX_SCANNER_VULNERABILITY_VERSION_**, no?

Reviewer: > It already supports arbitrary versions in the GET request from Scanner.

I think it does check for semantic versioning, especially for release builds

Author: Gotcha. Central doesn't need to pull from an API, it could consume scanner's files to determine that. Although, the API might be cleaner. This coupling between Central and Scanner might not be ideal.

Right now I am proposing we remove the check in Central, and make the check in Scanner -- which will use a `manifest.json` to validate the version being requested by Scanner is the same it has stored. That means the upload would not fail, but in fact, all versions inside the vulnerability bundle would be stored in Central and Central could serve all of them. This is a waste of storage, but it means Central can serve any bundle version supported up so far.

Any comments?

Reviewer 2: The fail on upload is a better user experience vs. uploading an offline bundle, thinking everything went OK, and then hours/days later realizing by chance nothing happened.

The 'immediate failure' was a requirement when we introduced the possibility for a 'bad bundle' (wrong version) to be uploaded. IMO we need to keep the validation.

[The check for nightlies](https://github.com/stackrox/stackrox/blob/e332cd19a639f59d9931414a4f4e561981396dad/central/scannerdefinitions/handler/handler.go#L661) is unnecessary and will be removed.

### Offline mode

> The offline mode will continue to serve every supported bundle version.  But instead of offering the latest Y-stream, it will offer all bundles supported by the vulnerability workflow, except for "dev".

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this has been updated since our conversation earlier, if all versions are added to the latest bundle then Central will need to be updated to choose / validate the correct version after upload.  

Also after reviewing what was implemented - older versions of ACS (ie: `4.4.x` and `4.5.x`) may need to have fixes backported to accept a bundle with multiple versions, we'll have to be careful to reduce impact to existing offline workflows that use latest.

Reviewer 3: Sorry I missed this part.  I think in offline mode we should instead offer the latest versioned bundle, which is v1 now (but in the future v2, v3, etc). If customer have trouble with accepting the latest versioned bundle, they will suggested to upgrade ACS. What do you guys think? @jvdm  @dcaravel

Author: > Not sure if this has been updated since our conversation earlier, if all versions are added to the latest bundle then Central will need to be updated to choose / validate the correct version after upload.

I am considering making Central serve all of them.

For previous offline bundles, I am considering converting them all to `v1` internally.

Any comments?

Author: I am not a fan of moving offline latest to new bundle version at every release because that would break customers until they upgrade, or they change their scripts to use `roxctl`.

### The bundle ingestions

> The bundle will modified to contain as `meta.json` file, which will carry the stackrox version and bundle version used to build it.  Scanner will include additional logic to reject a bundle that is not at the expected version.

Reviewer 2: nit: currently `manifest.json` is used in the v2 and v4 bundles which holds version information + other data.

Author: This is part of the offline bundle, right? The regular bundle should have an equivalent `manifest.json`. I think using the same name instead of `meta.json` makes more sense. Let me know what you think.

Reviewer 2: Yes - It's part of the offline bundles and the V2 'online bundle'.

From the 'latest' offline bundle:
```
scanner-vuln-updates.zip/scanner-defs.zip/manifest.json
scanner-vuln-updates.zip/scanner-v4-defs.zip/manifest.json
```

From the ScannerV2 'online' (diff) bundle:
```
diff.zip/manifest.json
```

Doesn't look like the V4 online bundle has a manifest (currently).

> The bundle will modified to contain as `meta.json` file, which will carry the stackrox version and bundle version used to build it.  Scanner will include additional logic to reject a bundle that is not at the expected version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bundle will modified to contain a `meta.json` file, which will carry the StackRox version and bundle version used to build it.  Scanner will include additional logic to reject a bundle that is not at the expected version.
```

### Deprecation

> Once a Stackrox release is out of support, we will remove the entry from the mapping, effectively disabling updates for that stream.

Reviewer 2: This will need a grace period or something like 'AFTER a release has been out of support for two cycles, then it will stop getting updates', it takes time for users validate a new version and upgrade.

Reviewer: I agree. We should come up with a formal policy and then add it to the product documentation, so nobody is (allowed to be) surprised (if they read the docs).

Author: I added a comment to the ADR to open room for such policy, but let's define it elsewhere (or even leave it open so we have some flexibility to change it easily).

> Once a Stackrox release is out of support, we will remove the entry from the mapping, effectively disabling updates for that stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a StackRox release is out of support, we will remove the entry from the mapping, effectively disabling updates for that stream.
```

In offline mode, one offline bundle per release was introduced for Scanner V4.  Coexisting with the "latest" Scanner V2 offline bundles.  To facilitate user migration to per-release offline bundles, the latest offline bundle used by Scanner V2 (at the time of this writing served at https://install.stackrox.io/scanner/scanner-vuln-updates.zip) was changed to contain Scanner V4's offline bundles for `4.[45][.x]` releases.  A command `roxctl scanner download-db` was created to facilitate users fetching the right offline bundle for their release.

This approach needs to be revised for the following reasons:

1.  The vulnerability schema rarely changes, but maintaining multiple bundles is expensive.  It requires multiple GitHub workflow runs, which increases the chances of failure and pressure on the security sources' endpoints.
2.  It can be challenging to backport fixes and updates to previous releases.  This requires patch releases, which trigger the release workflow.  Improving the release process can be complex, as it may require patch release cuts, changes to different branches, and integration between logic that is managed in the master branch, executing other releases binaries.

> 3.  The latest offline bundles does not support post `4.5` releases.  Bundle embedding for each release increases the cost to store and consume offline bundles.  The `roxctl` interface and documentation today needs to be clearer on these limitations.

Reviewer 2: nit: what was intended and what actually happened differ - the offline bundle as it exists right now contains `4.5` and not `4.4`
```suggestion
3.  The latest offline bundle does not support pre `4.5` releases.  Bundle embedding for each release increases the cost to store and consume offline bundles.  The `roxctl` interface and documentation today needs to be clearer on these limitations.
```

Author: > nit: what was intended and what actually happened differ - the offline bundle as it exists right now contains 4.5 and not 4.4

I decided to describe the intended behavior based on the docs and proposal doc. The current workflow is not functioning as intended, AFAIK. Does that make sense?

Initially, two version streams will exist (table 1 below):

| Stream | Git Ref      | Description                                                        |
|--------|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| dev    | heads/master | This stream tracks the latest vulnerability schema                 |
| v1     | heads/4.4.5  | This stream tracks the schema used by the current StackRox release |

On the subsequent releases (for example,. `4.4.6`), one of the two will be carried out:

1.  The schema hasn't changed, so v1 now tracks the new release (`heads/4.4.6`).
2.  The schema has changed, so v1 stays at the current release (`heads/4.4.5`), and a new version, v2, is created to track the next release (`heads/4.4.6`).

### Building versioned bundles

The GitHub workflow will have a map with "bundle version" as keys and "git reference" as values, similar to Table 1 above.  This can be stored statically in the matrix definition.

For each version in the mapping, a bundle will be built based on the specified git ref and stored at `https://definitions.stackrox.io/v4/<bundle-version>/vulnerabilities.zip`.

> In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release branch reference (e.g., `heads/4.4.6`).  Notice that if the version is the same, it will be updated.  If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.

Reviewer 2: > In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release branch reference (e.g., `heads/4.4.6`).

Based on the description I would assume `VULNERABILITY_VERSION` would contain the bundle version (i.e. `v1`) instead of the ref (i.e. `heads/4.4.6`), like this:

branch | `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` content
--- | ---
`master` | `dev`
`release-4.4` | `v1`
`release-4.5` | `v1`

The example however mentions "(e.g., `heads/4.4.6`)", could you clarify / provide an example of what the contents of this file will be for various branches, tags, etc.?  If the file contains the `ref`, I'm a bit confused how this improves current state, such that:

ACS version `4.4.6` was released with `VULNERABILITY_VERSION` = `heads/4.4.6`
ACS version `4.4.7` was released with `VULNERABILITY_VERSION` = `heads/4.4.7`
and so on.

Author: Let me clarify:

> In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release branch reference (e.g., `heads/4.4.6`).  Notice that if the version is the same, it will be updated.  If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.

In a release cut (let's say 4.6) we will look into `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION`, let's say its contents are:

```
$ cat canner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION
v1
```

So, now I will update the mapping to the current release branch reference. Let's say the mapping was:

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `heads/release-4.5`

So I will update `v1` to the new release (in this example `4.6`):

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `heads/release-4.6`

If in 4.6 we updated the bundle version, the content of the file would be:

```
$ cat canner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION
v2
```

Then the final table would be:

bundle version | git reference
--- | ---
`dev` | `master`
`v1` | `heads/release-4.5`
`v2` | `heads/release-4.6`

Reviewer 2: That makes sense now, can you add some details regarding the mapping? Where will that be stored and what format?

Author: That is intentionally open, it could be hard-coded in the YAML workflow, or a separate file. It depends on how and where the mapping between releases and bundle versions are needed.

Author: I added this example to the ADR.

> In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release branch reference (e.g., `heads/4.4.6`).  Notice that if the version is the same, it will be updated.  If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.

Reviewer 2: Should this read " **NOT** be updated "?

```suggestion
In every release cut, the key specified in `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be updated in the mapping to the current release branch reference (e.g., `heads/4.4.6`).  Notice that if the version is the same, it will NOT be updated.  If it's new, it will be added, and the previous version will stay.
```

Author: No, it will be updated. This will bump the curent vulnerability version to the new release branch (or reference, or tag, or whatever we want to use). See my previous example. I offered two examples, one without a version bump and another with.

> Offline bundles per release will not be created anymore, but per bundle version.  The latest offline bundle will ship all bundle versions currently supported by StackRox.

Reviewer 2: > The latest offline bundle will ship all bundle versions currently supported by StackRox.

What is the motivation for doing this? That would mean the latest offline bundle would contain (current state):

```
k8s-istio.zip
scanner-defs.zip
scanner-v4-defs-4.4.zip  <- new
scanner-v4-defs-4.5.zip
scanner-v4-defs-v1.zip   <- new
scanner-v4-defs-v2.zip   <- new 
etc.
```
Bundle would be approaching 1GB. This seems wasteful and cost prohibitive for an ACS install that would only ever need one version. We had previously communicated that there was no guarantee post `4.4` we would be adding additional versions to this bundle.

Author: > What is the motivation for doing this? That would mean the latest offline bundle would contain (current state):

Kinda, I think it would look like:

```
k8s-istio.zip
scanner-defs.zip
scanner-v4-defs-4.5.zip
scanner-v4-defs-v1.zip   <- new
```

Later, if we have v2 (while 4.5 is still supported) we would have:

```
k8s-istio.zip
scanner-defs.zip
scanner-v4-defs-4.5.zip
scanner-v4-defs-v1.zip
scanner-v4-defs-v2.zip   <- new
```

And once 4.5 is out, we can remove it from the bundle.

If the size is a concern, we could fashion the possibility of having some hard-coded mapping in the handler to understand that `scanner-v4-defs-4.5.zip` is the same as `v1`. So the mapping would be first:

```
k8s-istio.zip
scanner-defs.zip
scanner-v4-defs-4.5.zip
```

And then when `v2` arrives:

```
k8s-istio.zip
scanner-defs.zip
scanner-v4-defs-4.5.zip
scanner-v4-defs-v2.zip
```

But that's hacky.

Author: > Bundle would be approaching 1GB. This seems wasteful and cost prohibitive for an ACS install that would only ever need one version. We had previously communicated that there was no guarantee post 4.4 we would be adding additional versions to this bundle.

Is it? I was assuming ~1GiB was fine, for the benefit of simplifying the customer's workflow (use latest, don't worry about version), and the implementation (no need to expose the <release> -> <bundle version> mapping to places (roxctl, central handler, etc). But, if that's not the case, let's update this to deprecate the latest offline bundle, and move forward with version offline bundles (which I think is what we had agreed to do before).

Reviewer 2: > And once 4.5 is out, we can remove it from the bundle.

If current user behaviors are an indicator - we may not be able to remove 4.5 until possibly 'years' after its released / out of support (more so when factoring in exceptions)

> Is it? I was assuming ~1GiB was fine

The net pipe to get data from the 'web' in/out of a heavily isolated environment may be intentionally limited and heavily inspected/monitored. In past experience I have faced issues transmitting smaller files.

> for the benefit of simplifying the customer's workflow (use latest, don't worry about version), and the implementation

That was the intention behind `roxctl download scanner-db` - don't need to work about version - always get the 'right file' (in theory), that would allow us to make things as complicated or as simple as behind the scenes and the user will have a single experience.

> (no need to expose the -> mapping to places (roxctl, central handler, etc

Don't know the details behind the mapping file and how its stored/structured, but we will know for a 'version' of ACS the value of `VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will be static right?

We shouldn't need to expose the mapping, `roxctl download scanner-db` will get the 'version' to download from Central, which in turn can get the version from scanner (or when we build Central also include version so it can be returned via a simple API call).  

Having that version available also enables doing validation.

Author: > If current user behaviors are an indicator - we may not be able to remove 4.5 until possibly 'years' after its released / out of support (more so when factoring in exceptions)

Sure, I am considering that when I said "once 4.5 is out". In other words, I am willing to keep 4.5 for some time.

> The net pipe to get data from the 'web' in/out of a heavily isolated environment may be intentionally limited and heavily inspected/monitored. In past experience I have faced issues transmitting smaller files.

Do you have some numbers of what would be painful or even problematic? I am curious to understand how moving from ~400MiB to ~600MiB would be an issue.

> That was the intention behind roxctl download scanner-db - don't need to worry about version - always get the 'right file' (in theory), that would allow us to make things as complicated or as simple as we want behind the scenes - the user will have a single experience.

I am aware of `roxctl`'s support for pulling the bundle. But I still think that customers would prefer not migrating to `roxctl` if needed. I agree that if customers all use `roxctl` things would be better for us, but better from them might be "keep using a single offline bundle".

> We shouldn't need to expose the mapping, roxctl download scanner-db will get the 'version' to download from Central, 

I am also aware of the potential implementation for this, and how the one you suggested is possible. I am sorry, I should have left a "consequence" entry for that signaling I am not proposing using latest because I don't know how it could be done with offline bundle versions -- I am actually thinking it might not be worth doing it.

I think right now I am considering the size impact more than anything -- if the size increase in the latest bundle is indeed painful to the point it make the flow worse for customers compared to migrating to `roxctl` in their scripts, then I would change my opinion on moving forward with the versioned offline bundles.

Reviewer 2: > Do you have some numbers of what would be painful or even problematic? I am curious to understand how moving from ~400MiB to ~600MiB would be an issue.

No, those would differ per user, environment, etc.

### Ingesting versioned bundles

Scanner will know the vulnerability version it requires based on hard-coded information added during build time.  A file at `scanner/VULNERABILITY_VERSION` will determine the version on release builds and nightlies.  On non-release builds this will hard-coded to "dev".

The definitions handler in Central can be kept the same.  It already supports arbitrary versions in the GET request from Scanner.  [The check for nightlies](https://github.com/stackrox/stackrox/blob/e332cd19a639f59d9931414a4f4e561981396dad/central/scannerdefinitions/handler/handler.go#L661) and other per-release checks in the ingestion path are unnecessary and will be removed.

The bundle version will be configured in the vulnerability URL by a new variable called `ROX_VULNERABILITY_VERSION` to specify the expected bundle version to fetch.  The previous variable `ROX_VERSION` will be left for backward compatibility.

The vulnreability bundle will include a `manifest.json` file, which will carry the StackRox version and bundle version used to build it.  This file will be used by Scanner to prevent ingestion of unsupported bundle versions.

> In offline mode, the `roxctl` method for fetching bundles will be modified to fetch only the latest bundle.

Reviewer 2: Not a fan of this, would recommend keeping the logic to choose the bundle (v1, v2, 4.4, etc.) that has data appropriate to current ACS version. 

The latest bundle is currently 340MB, adding this new `v1` will make that 500MB, if we 'fix' the 4.4 issue that will be 670MB, etc..  IMHO we should focus on making the bundles minimal to reduce costs and improve the user experience (the larger the file to manage the more likely will be issues with storage, transfers, wait times, etc.)

Author: Oh, so it's even smaller than 1GiB. I think we can go with not supporting 4.4 (not GA), and we can ship 4.5 + v1 (~500MiB) until we have v2 (where we can potentially remove 4.5? Or do the hacky thing I mentioned before? to keep the bundle around <600MiB). Is it really a pain to have a bundle of that size for the benefit of having one offline bundle for all releases?

Reviewer 2: > I think we can go with not supporting 4.4 (not GA), and we can ship 4.5 + v1 (~500MiB) until we have v2 (where we can potentially remove 4.5?

I'm skeptical if we'll be able to remove 4.5 - I'd bet on having to keep it around 'years' if current behaviors are an indicator.

> Is it really a pain to have a bundle of that size for the benefit of having one offline bundle for all releases?

It may be, we may even run into limits in the `emptyDir` in the Central deploy.  If there is consensus for the super bundle so be it, however my vote / recommendation is to keep the version specific bundles (`v1`, `v2`, `4.5`, etc.) as the long term strat (should be simple enough as we'll only have a few right?)  Another thought is on download/upload (via roxctl) we can 'repackage' the zip so that we only upload the specific pieces needed.

Still if size becomes a problem (slow pipe?) then a file for the specific version will be more efficient overall.

Perhaps another thing to consider is we eventually will need scanner-v4-indexer/matcher to return a version to report status (ROX-21362) - be simple to add the 'VULNERABILITY_VERSION' to the same response (and get a head start)

Author: I think the path to versioned offline bundles are very possible, and not ambiguous -- it just require additional work. Like I said above, right now I am concerned only with the size impact more than anything -- if the size increase in the latest bundle is indeed painful to the point it make the flow worse for customers compared to migrating to roxctl in their scripts, then I would change my opinion on moving forward with the versioned offline bundles.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps another consideration - entertaining the scenario a user DOES have an issue with a 600MB+ offline bundle, what would our options be to help that user?  

With minimal versioned bundles we have an option - use the versioned bundle.

With the giant bundle, assuming downloads aren't an issue, we would ask the user to download the bundle, extract it, remove ~50%+ of the data that is unused, and then try the upload again - the user would have to do this every time they download the offline bundle (daily+)

Author: It was determined that offline bundle size is a concern for certain use-cases. Then, the decision will support both paths: versioned and latest offline bundles, with `roxctl` being able to pull offline bundles using `download-db` the same as today.
